.\" $Header: /cvsroot/ishmail/ishmail/man/man1/ishmail.1,v 1.3 2001/03/29 11:07:24 evgeny Exp $ $Id: ishmail.1,v 1.3 2001/03/29 11:07:24 evgeny Exp $
.TH ISHMAIL 1 "March 29, 2001" " " "Electronic Mail"
.SH "NAME"
ishmail \- Information SuperHighway Mail
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.nf
.ft 4
\f4ishmail\f1 [\f2standard_X11_flags\f1] [\f2name1\f1 [\f2name2\f1 . . . \
\f2nameN\f1]] [\f2-v\f1] [ & ]
.ft 1
.fi
.RE
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\f2Ishmail\f1 is a graphical user interface (GUI) to the \f2sendmail\f1 mail
delivery subsystem. You can use \f2Ishmail\f1 to receive, read, compose, and
organize electronic mail messages containing standard 7-bit ASCII text
information, as well as the specially formatted information provided by MIME
(Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension), including Rich Text, audio, video,
image (facsimile) and application information.
.PP
\f2Ishmail\f1 has three primary window interfaces, the Main Window, the
Composition Window, and the Reading Window. Each window contains pull-down,
tear-off, and cascading menus from which you select options that perform
various command functions in the window.
.PP
The Main Window is displayed upon startup. From the Main Window, you choose
options to manage your mail folders and files, read and compose mail messages,
reply to, forward, and resend messages, and customize your mail environment.
.PP
Interacting with mail objects in the Main Window is simple and intuitive. In
general, you select an object or multiple objects (mail folder, mail message,
alias name, and so forth), then select a command from one of the menus to
perform some action on the selected object.
.PP
The Composition Window is displayed when you select the \f4compose\f1,
\f4reply\f1, \f4forward\f1, or \f4resend\f1 command from the Main Window or
from a Reading Window. The Composition Window menus contain options for
specifying an alternate editor, previewing the formatted output of messages
containing Rich Text attributes, and including and attaching external files to
messages. You can have multiple Composition Windows open simultaneously.
.PP
The Reading Window is displayed when you select the \f4read\f1 command from the
Main Window. The Reading Window menus contain options for reading the next or
previous message, saving a message, printing a message, deleting a message, and
other functions. While in the Reading Window, you can also display and print
MIME-encoded inclusions and attachments via external viewing and printing
software that \f2Ishmail\f1 launches when you select a MIME-encoded body part.
You can "pin" multiple Reading Windows to the screen.
.PP
Each of \f2Ishmail's\f1 primary windows contains an \f4Options\f1 menu in which
you specify parameters for customizing the "look and feel" of the particular
window. Customization options include changing display fonts and font sizes,
adding shortcut buttons for commonly performed functions, specifying sort
parameters, word-wrap, and so forth.
.SH "FOLDER FORMATS"
.PP
\f2Ishmail\f1 supports two basic types of mail folder formats. One is the
\f2unix-mail\f1 format, common to programs such as \f2mailx\f1, \f2elm\f1, etc.
The other is \f2mh\f1 format, common to programs such as \f2mh\f1, \f2xmh\f1,
and \f2exmh\f1. You can read, create, and append to folder formats of either
type.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.PP
\f2Ishmail\f1 accepts the standard \f2X\f1 client command line arguments.
Warning messages are displayed on the command line if unrecognized option flags
are used.
.TP 1i
\f2X client option flags\f1
The standard \f2X\f1 client option flags as described in Using Command-line
Options in the\f2 X User's Guide\f1. (See also X User's Reference for
additional information about \f2X\f1 command line options.)
.TP 1i
\f2name1\f1,\f4 \f1\f2name2 ... nameN\f1
The names of the mail folders you wish to open during \f2Ishmail\f1 startup.
These names are relative to the directory in which the command is being run. To
make Ishmail look for them in your folder directory, add `\f4+\f1' or `\f4=\f1'
before the name.
.IP
When the program starts, these folders and the default In-box, or "system
folder," are opened and presented in \f2Ishmail's\f1 main window.
.TP 1i
\f4&\f1
The standard flag to the UNIX shell indicating that the program should run in
the background.
.TP 1i
\f4-v\f1
Print version number and exit.
.IP
\f3Caution\f1: \f2Ishmail\f1 catches and ignores all signals, except
\f4SIGKILL(9)\f1 and \f4SIGTERM(15)\f1. If a SIGTERM is caught the program
attempts to clean up and exit gracefully. If a \f4SIGKILL\f1 is caught the
program exits immediately, potentially leaving lock files around and losing
un-saved changes to mail folders. \f4SIGKILL\f1 should be used only as a last
resort for termination.



.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.TP
.B ISHHOME
The directory \f2Ishmail\f1 is installed into. By default,
\f4/usr/local/share/ishmail\f1.
.TP
.B ISHMAILRC
The location of the \f4.ishmailrc\f1 configuration file. By default, it is in
\f4~/.ishmailrc\f1.
.TP
.B ISHIDX
The directory where \f2Ishmail\f1 puts the mailbox index files. The default is
to use the same directory as the associated folder. This sometimes is a problem
for the InBox, as users don't have privilege to create files in the system mail
folder directory (e.g. \f4/var/spool/mail\f1).
.TP
.B MAIL
The location of the mailbox where incoming mail arrives. Usually
\f4/var/spool/mail/$USER\f1.
.TP
.B MAILCAPS
The column-separated list of mailcap files. The default one is
\f4~/.mailcap:/etc/mailcap: /usr/etc/mailcap:/usr/local/etc/mailcap\f1.
.TP
.B MIMETYPES
The location of the \f4mime.types\f1 file. The default one is
$ISHHOME/lib/mime.types
.TP
.B MAILCHECK
Mail checking interval in seconds.
.TP
.B NAME
The full name of the user.


.SH "FILES"
.TP
.B ~/.ishmailrc
This file stores the personal settings, those that can be changed via the
Options menu. See \f4ISHMAILRC\f1 above.
.TP
.B ~/.ishmail.pem
If compiled with support for SSL/TLS connections, the file stores public
certificates of IMAP servers which validity can not be rigorously verified for
some reason but the user nevertheless trusted.
.TP
.B $ISHHOME/lib/Ishmail
The file #include's several others; for example \f4Ishmail.colors\f1 is (you
guessed) where the color resources are defined. These files are system-wide
settings for all users. They (except \f4Ishmail.site\f1) are overwritten when
you upgrade Ishmail, so don't make changes to them directly - but you can look
at them to see which settings can be changed.
.TP
.B $ISHHOME/lib/Ishmail.site
Here you can add your own changes that will affect all users on the system.
.TP
.B ~/.mailrc
Contains the e-mail aliases.
.TP
.B mailcap
Contains specifications for handling creation, display, and printing of various
MIME data types. See \f4MAILCAPS\f1 above.
.TP
.B mime.types
Defines the recognized file types. See \f4MIMETYPES\f1 above.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\f4X11\f1(7), \f4mail\f1(1), \f4sendmail\f1(8), \f4openssl\f1(1), Ishmail
User's Guide.
